---
layout: page
title: Expectations and Mentorship Philosophy for Theses
nav: false
permalink: undergrad-research-goals
---

# Expectations and Mentorship Outlook

An undergraduate thesis is a serious undertaking. As we work on thesis
research, we will be working towards the following goal:

> At the end of your year in collaboration with me, you will aim to
> produce one conference-quality (or workshop-quality) paper, suitable
> to be submitted to a competitive venune in CS.

Learning how to do research takes many years. Realistically, it is
unlikely that all (or even most) senior theses will result in top
publications with just a year's worth of work. But with a bit of luck
and hard work from both of us, I expect we will be able to produce
good work that could credibly be *submitted* to a respectable venue.

Research takes many forms, and often the problem we end up working on
is not the one we initially anticipated. Because of this, we have to
be flexible and maintain an evolving view of what we're doing. It's
also possible that the idea we have just won't end up being all that
interesting. Negative results are common in research, but as long as
you try hard I'm sure we'll both learn and produce something useful.

While this will certainly be a challenging journey, I plan to work
hard with you, and I hope you'll do the same!

## Expectations

- You are open to doing serious reserach in CS that could lead to
  publication.

- We will meet regularly, and you will participate in group
  discussions (for ~15 minutes) about your progress a few times a
  week.

- You will ensure that you're consistently making progress, at least a
  few hours a week.

- You will bring up problems early so we can quickly address them and
  move forward.

- You will uphold high ethics to sure we're always doing honest
  science. For example, we will consider all data, especially when it
  runs counter to our hypotheses.

## Goals

The goal of an undergraduate thesis is to teach you how to do
high-quality research. It's totally okay to fail to produce stellar
earth-shattering results. But you should learn the mechanics of
research: working on (an identifying) open-ended problems,
articulating their importance, understanding the state of the art, and
implementing novel solutions.

## Unstructured time

I often find that the most challenging part of research is the large
amount of unstructured time without clear goals. Unlike coursework
(where you have to find an answer), research is about finding a
*problem*. While hunting around for problems, it is often really
unclear how to evaluate whether you're making progress, and this can
feel really stressful.

This is where I come in. When you start to feel like you're hitting a
wall, we should meet and brainstorm about what makes the most sense to
work on next. Every week, we will identify clear (but attainable)
goals for the next week. We will check in to make sure we're hitting
those goals, and if we're not we'll step back and ask ourselves why.

## Transparency

As you work on solving problems, you'll have much more context than I
do about the particulars of our techniques and approaches. There will
be times when the plans we make initially don't really make sense when
you begin to work. This might be because one of us was missing
something. In these cases, please speak up early and articulate why
you're stuck: perhaps we can come up with a better way to do things. I
don't want you to do unnecessary work if there's a better way. I've
often found that a few hours brainstorming about a better methodology
can save days of implementation work.

On the flip side, I understand that not everything works
out. Deadlines slip, ideas fail, and we can't always achieve
everything we'd hoped. In these instances I think it's best to be
honest with ourselves early about what we can realistically achieve so
that we don't set ourselves up for failure. If you begin to feel
frustrated by an aspect of a problem, I expect you to reach out so
that we can reorient as early as possible.

## Update Meetings

I plan to hold short (10-15 minute) meetings a few times a week that
I'd like you to participate in. This is borrowed from an idea we used
when I was a PhD student at Maryland (here's a
[paper](http://www.cs.umd.edu/~mwh/papers/score.pdf) discussing
it). You basically come and give a brief update about what you've done
and will do. These meetings are intended to motivate you and provide a
light form of accountabilty to each other: you won't get in trouble if
you haven't dont much, but ideally they'll be a place to help
understand the nuts-and-bolts of how research works.
