---
layout: page
title: Teaching
nav: true
---

# Teaching

I love it! Sign up and let's have a class together!

## [CMSC 245, Fall 2017](http://kmicinski.com/cmsc245)

I am currently teaching CMSC 245, Principles of Programming
Languages. The course covers programming paradigms at several
different levels of hardware abstraction, and teaches students to both
understand how the machine executes code and expand their foundational
understanding of programming abstractions. The main course website is
[here](http://kmicinski.com/cmsc245).

## CMSC 330, Summer 2015

{:.smallright}
![330 Board screenshot]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/330board.jpg)

[Course webpage](https://cs.umd.edu/class/summer2015/cmsc330/)

[Link to GitHub repository with examples](https://github.com/kmicinski/cmsc330examples)

During the summer of 2015, I taught CMSC 330, an undergraduate course
on programming languages.  CMSC 330 covers a wide range of concepts in
programming languages: both foundational and practical. In particular,
the students learn OCaml, Ruby, and Prolog, and learn core material
such as automata theory (finite state machines and grammars) and
programming language semantics.

For the Summer 2015 iteration of the course, I reworked a large part
of the lectures to cover the same set of material, but presented it in
an interactive style: developing concepts in class, while
supplementing this development with projects and course notes. I also
elected to put more emphasis on teaching functional programming and
programming language semantics. The course included extensive coverage
of small step semantics: for one project students implement an
interpreter for a core-ML.

Relevant lecture material I particular enjoyed writing includes:

- [A set of lecture notes on introductory functional programming](https://github.com/kmicinski/cmsc330examples/tree/master/ocaml)

- [Notes on the lambda calculus and introductory semantics in the big, small, and abstract machine style](https://github.com/kmicinski/cmsc330examples/tree/master/lambda-calculus)

- [Notes on the OCaml module system](https://github.com/kmicinski/cmsc330examples/tree/master/module-systems)

## One off lectures

Occasionally I get invited to give one-off lectures in various
classes. I see this as a great opportunity to expend some energy into
digesting a topic well enough to present it to other people in a
comprehensible way. In particular, I have a set of lectures I've given
(some a few times) in courses:

- [A set of slides on dependent types]({{ site.baseurl }} /assets/Micinski-631-Dependent-Types-14.pdf) for David Van Horn's CMSC631
  graduate class on programming languages
