---
layout: post
title:  "Why I hope you'll submit to Scheme Workshop"
date:   2019-04-10
categories: research functional-programming scheme
---

[**Link to this year's Scheme Workshop CFP**](https://thomas.gilray.org/scheme-2019/)

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the workshop on [Scheme
and Functional Programming](http://www.schemeworkshop.org/). The
Scheme Workshop represents a diverse community of hackers, academics,
and enthusiasts. The workshop offers a forum to share insights,
experience, and technical developments of and within the Scheme family
of programming languages. Rather than focus on a specific
implementation or community, workshop attendees are united by an
appreciation for succinct expression of novel ideas realized via
programming. The submission deadline is **May 24th, 2019**, I hope
you'll help us celebrate by submitting a paper!

#### What is Scheme Workshop?

The Scheme Workshop website describes it as a...

> Yearly meeting of programming language practitioners who share an
  aesthetic sense embodied by the Algorithmic Language Scheme:
  universality through minimalism, and flexibility through rigorous
  design.

Here's my personal take. I love Scheme Workshop because it brings
together a group of people with a truly unique perspective on
programming. We represent a diverse background, but a shared vision:
to distill insights about programming to their most economic
presentation. We appreciate thoughtful, comprehensible solutions to
challenging problems. We challenge ourselves to step outside of our
boundaries and build fundamentally new paradigms for expressing
ideas. Our mission is to build a community where we foster diversity,
education, and support each other in pursuit of these ideals.

Scheme Workshop is unique in that it is:

- **Open to everyone who cares about Scheme-ish ideas**. Instead of
     focusing on promoting the most cutting edge results, Scheme
     Workshop centers around thoughtful discussions relating to unique
     ideas that embody the ethos of Scheme. You don't have to be an
     academic to attend; in fact, we have a rich history of
     participation from hobbyists and industrial attendees.

- **Non-archival and open access**. We aim to support and foster unique
    ideas. Naturally, some of these ideas may grow into work
    eventually submitted to research conferences. Scheme Workshop
    provides a platform for researchers to get perspective from the
    Scheme community on their work at all stages of development. While
    we publish a technical report of submitted papers, submission to
    Scheme Workshop does not preclude subsequent submission to
    archival research conferences. In fact, we see Scheme Workshop as
    an ideal proving ground for groundbreaking research ideas. We hope
    that the discussions generated by the presentation of those ideas
    at Scheme Workshop will productively inform the authors'
    scholarship.

- **Supportive of off-the-wall ideas**. There are some ideas that
    are really interesting, kind of zany, and just inspire us in a
    deep way we can't quite put our finger on. These ideas aren't
    necessarily the kind that would fit well at a programming-oriented
    conference, but they might not be a good fit for research
    conferences either. Scheme Workshop is a perfect venue for these
    kinds of ideas. You'll find like-minded people who enjoy
    challenging their perspectives on what programming even means.

- **A great place for your first paper**. We place an emphasis on
    giving thoughtful, high-quality, and friendly reviews. We also
    have a strong appreciation for "half-baked" ideas. When I was a
    beginning PhD student, submitting to so-called top conferences
    often felt overwhelming. Scheme Workshop wants to help budding
    researchers develop their writing and presentation. Similarly, we
    realize that great ideas can come from people in industry, the
    open-source community, or the broader hobbyist community. We work
    hard to ensure that their ideas are taken seriously and give them
    the feedback they deserve.

#### What about Racket, Haskell, Clojure, SML, C++, etc...?

The language isn't what's important, it's the idea. We want the
workshop to be filled with exciting talks that broaden our horizons
and challenge us to think about programming in a way we wouldn't have
before. I could easily imagine relevant papers dealing with template
metaprogramming in C++, hygiene in OCaml, or domain-specific languages
in Clojure.

If you think your idea *might* be relevant to the workshop, please
don't hesitate to contact Tom and myself. We'll gladly give you
an honest assessment of whether your idea would be a good fit. If not,
we'll do our best to direct you towards an appropriate venue for your
ideas.

#### Who should submit?

Traditionally, submissions to Scheme Workshop come from those within
or adjacent to academia. However, this is **not** a requirement. We
welcome submissions from everyone who thinks they have something
thoughtful to say to the Scheme community. This year, I want to
specifically encourage submissions from:

- Undergraduate or graduate students who are looking for practice
  writing papers on their own. It can be a challenge to develop your
  own sense of research style. Scheme Workshop is a great place to get
  feedback on your work in a low-stakes environment. Rather than judge
  the quality of your work against a high technical bar, we want to
  help build your ideas and presentation so that you can be proud of
  the way you're articulating them.

- People within the tech industry who have never written an academic
  paper before. Scheme Workshop leans a bit more academic than
  conferences such as RacketCon and StrangeLoop. However, this doesn't
  mean we don't value ideas from industry. If you're in industry and
  would like to write a paper but aren't sure how, please reach out to
  me: I'm happy to Skype with you and speak frankly about how the
  process works.

- Seasoned Scheme wizards. Scheme Workshop has a long history of
  insightful talks from key contributors to the Scheme community. These
  community members shape our vision, and guide newcomers (such as
  myself!) by helping us understand the key principles that embody the
  Scheme community.

#### Some random Scheme Workshop papers I liked

There's truly been some amazing work at Scheme Workshop over the
years.  I can't hope to summarize it all here. Instead, I picked a
random collection of papers to help you get an idea of the workshop's
direction.

- [A Self-Hosting Evaluator using
  HOAS](http://schemeworkshop.org/2006/15-barzilay.pdf), by Eli
  Barzilay. This paper discusses how--when you're implementing a
  Scheme interpreter in Scheme--you can avoid implementing
  substitution by reflecting lambdas from the source language into the
  metalangauge (which still gives you means of abstracting, e.g.,
  control structure). This is a neat idea that is the perfect size for
  Scheme Workshop.

- [Interaction-Safe State for the
  Web](http://scheme2006.cs.uchicago.edu/03-mccarthy.pdf) by Jay
  McCarthy and Shriram Krishnamurthi. This paper discusses new
  linguistic mechanisms for building abstractions for how we
  understand navigation within web applications. I think this idea
  nicely combines the practice of building web applications correctly
  with the linguistic abstraction mechanisms afforded by Scheme.

- [Well-typed programs can't be
  blamed](http://users.cs.northwestern.edu/~robby/pubs/papers/scheme2007-wf.pdf)
  by Philip Wadler and Robby Findler. This paper from 2007 appears to
  be an earlier version of the highly influential 2009 ESOP paper of the
  same name.

- [Implementing Continuations Marks in
  JavaScript](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/dherman/research/papers/scheme08-stack-marks.pdf)
  by John Clements, Ayswarya Sundaram, and David Herman. This paper
  discusses how continuation marks can be implemented in JavaScript. I
  see this as an exciting paper exploring a novel idea in a new space,
  and the authors mention some foundational challenges in scaling up
  to languages that allow tail calls with conventional "return"-style
  semantics.

- [A pattern matcher for miniKanren--or--How to get into trouble with
  CPS macros](https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~lkuper/papers/lambdae.pdf)
  by Andy Keep, Michael Adams, Lindsey Kuper, Will Byrd, and Dan
  Friedman. This paper reveals an interesting ramification of writing
  macros in a CPS-based style alongside conditional macro
  expansion. They build a pattern matcher for the miniKanren
  programming language, demonstrating the issue along the way. I like
  that this paper reveals a foundational problem in macro engineering.

#### Help us build a community!

The goal of Scheme Workshop is to build a community that celebrates
the fun in presenting beautifully minimal ideas. We often masquerade
these ideas as programs. But we're all bound together by the passion
we share for articulating our ideas in an elegant way. Programming
languages give us the ability to rapidly interact with our ideas,
breaking and rebuilding our realization of those ideas at a pace never
before seen by humanity. Scheme celebrates this opportunity by
allowing us unprecedented flexibility in the way we articulate and
execute these ideas.

I hope that you share my excitement. If you do, I sincerely hope
you'll consider submitting a paper to [the twentieth workshop on
Scheme and Functional
Programming](https://thomas.gilray.org/scheme-2019/)!
