---
layout: post
title:  "Why I hope you'll submit to Scheme Workshop"
date:   2019-04-10
categories: research functional-programming
---

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the workshop on [Scheme
and Functional Programming](http://www.schemeworkshop.org/). The
Scheme Workshop represents a diverse community of hackers, academics,
and enthusiasts coming together to celebrate the rich impact of the
ideas broadly associated with the Scheme programming language. I'm
writing this to encourage you to help us celebrate by submitting a
paper!

#### What is Scheme Workshop?

The Scheme Workshop website describes it as a...

> Yearly meeting of programming language practitioners who share an
  aesthetic sense embodied by the Algorithmic Language Scheme:
  universality through minimalism, and flexibility through rigorous
  design.

Here's my personal take. I love Scheme Workshop because it brings
together a group of people with a truly unique perspective on
programming. We represent a diverse background, but a shared vision:
to distill insights about programming to their most economic
presentation. We appreciate thoughtful, comprehensible solutions to
challenging problems. We challenge ourselves to step outside of our
boundaries and build fundamentally new paradigms for expressing
ideas. Our mission is to build a community where we foster diversity,
education, and support each other in pursuit of these ideals.

Scheme Workshop is unique in that it is:

- **Open to everyone who cares about Scheme-"ish" ideas**. Perhaps
    unlike other academic conferences and workshops, SW is focused on
    having thoughtful discussions on cool and unique ideas that embody
    the ethos of the Scheme programming language. You don't have to be
    an academic to attend, and the workshop's focus is specifically
    *not* on publishing the most "cutting edge" or technically
    brilliant results.

- **Non-archival**. The focus of the workshop is to generate engaging
    discussions within the Scheme community and share cool ideas. This
    means that our focus is *not* on technically brilliant work
    (though plenty of that have appeared at SW in the past!). Rather,
    our goal is to provide a forum where presenters can share results
    in a way that best suits their vision.

- **Supportive of "off-the-wall" ideas**. There are some ideas that
    are really interesting, kind of zany, and just inspire us in a
    deep way we can't quite put our finger on. These ideas aren't
    necessarily the kind that would fit well at a programming-oriented
    conference, but they might not be a good fit for research
    conferences either. Scheme Workshop is a perfect venue for these
    kinds of ideas. You'll find like-minded people who enjoy
    challenging their perspectives on what programming even means.

- **A great place for your "first" paper**. We place an emphasis on
    giving thoughtful, high-quality, and friendly reviews. We also
    have a strong appreciation "half-baked" ideas. When I was a
    beginning PhD student, the process of submitting to "top"
    conferences often felt overwhelming. Scheme Workshop wants to help
    budding researchers develop their ideas, writing, and
    presentation. Similarly, we realize that great ideas can come from
    people in industry, the open-source community, or the broader
    community. We work hard to ensure that their ideas are taken
    seriously and give them the feedback they deserve.

#### Logistics

Scheme Workshop 2019 will be held alongside the 2019 [International
Conference on Functional Programming
(ICFP)](https://icfp19.sigplan.org/) in Berlin, Germany. The workshop
itself will take place Sunday, August 18th. The submission deadline is
**May 24th, 2019**. Scheme Workshop accepts three types of papers:
full papers, experience reports, and lightning talks. The page length
for full papers and experience reports is 14 pages, **however**, you
should feel free to submit even if you don't believe that your idea
will need 14 full pages to present. We will consider all ideas, and
(like Scheme itself) we appreciate economy in the presentation of your
ideas. Lightning talks are 5-minute presentations, followed by 5
minutes of questions. If you'd like to give a lightning talk, we ask
that you submit a short blurb briefly (in 192 words or less)
describing your idea.

Unfortunately, we cannot pay conference expenses for speakers.

#### What about Racket, Haskell, Clojure, SML, C++, etc...?

The language isn't what's important, it's the idea. We want the
workshop to be filled with exciting talks that broaden our horizons
and challenge us to think about programming in a way we wouldn't have
before. I could easily imagine relevant papers about template
metaprogramming in C++, hygiene in OCaml, or domain-specific languages
in Clojure.

If you think your idea *might* be relevant to the workshop, please
don't hesitate to contact the workshop chairs. We'll gladly give you
an honest assessment of whether your idea would be a good fit. If not,
we'll do our best to direct you towards an appropriate venue for your
ideas.

#### Who should submit?

Traditionally, submissions to Scheme Workshop come from those within
or adjacent to academia. However, this is **not** a requirement. We
welcome submissions from everyone who thinks they have something
thoughtful to say to the Scheme community. This year, I want to
specifically encourage submissions from:

- Undergraduate or graduate students who are looking for practice
  writing papers "on their own." It can be a challenge to develop your
  own sense of research style. Scheme Workshop is a great place to get
  feedback on your work in a low-stakes environment. Rather than judge
  the quality of your work against a high technical bar, we want to
  help build your ideas and presentation so that you can be proud of
  the way you're articulating them.

- People within the tech industry who have never written an "academic"
  paper before. Scheme Workshop leans a bit more academic than
  conferences such as RacketCon and StrangeLoop. However, this doesn't
  mean we don't value ideas from industry. If you're in industry and
  would like to write a paper but aren't sure how, please reach out to
  me: I'm happy to Skype with you and speak frankly about how the
  process works.

- Seasoned Scheme wizards. Scheme Workshop has a long history of
  insightful talks from key contributors to the Scheme ethos. These
  community members shape our vision, and guide newcomers (such as
  myself!) by helping us understand the key principles that embody the
  Scheme community.

#### Help us build a community

The goal of Scheme Workshop is to build a community that celebrates
the fun in presenting beautifully minimal ideas. We often masquerade
these ideas as programs. But we're all bound together by the passion
we share for articulating our ideas in an elegant way. Programming
languages give us the ability to rapidly interact with our ideas,
breaking and rebuilding our realization of those ideas at a pace never
before seen by humanity. Scheme celebrates this opportunity by
allowing us unprecedented flexibility in the way we articulate and
execute these ideas.

I hope that you share my excitement. If you do, I sincerely hope
you'll consider submitting a paper to [the twentieth workshop on
Scheme and Functional
Programming](https://thomas.gilray.org/scheme-2019/)!
